# Anomaly Detection
## Overview

The aim of this project is to apply deeplearning principles to detect
anomalies from logs.

To identify if a single log line from an application or system
indicates an error condition is quite straightforward. The log line
will likely have a field indicating the severity of the log along with
some description. However detecting if a set of log lines indicate an
anomaly involves looking at multiple log lines and discerning
patterns from them and then arriving at a conclusion that the
pattern(s) look abnormal.

The principles of deeplearning can be applied look for patterns across
multiple lines and detect anomalous patterns. [CNNs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_network) 
are widely used for tasks like image recognition and [Siamese neural
network](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siamese_neural_network) are
used for tasks like signature verification. This project makes use of
CNN and Siamese neural network to detect anomalies from logs.

A triplet of synthetic logs: anchor, positive, and negative logs are
generated. The model is trained on these logs, the validation loss of
the model is calculated based separate set of triplets that are not
seen during the training. A set of golden parameters (centroid, mu,
and sigma) are generated from the positive samples in the validation
set and are stored. During the inference the user would provide a set
of logs and these logs in batches are compared against the golden
parameters and the trained model calculates the probability of the
batch being anomalous. Any batch with anomalous probability > 0.5 is
marked "abnormal".

## Synthetic data generation
To demonstrate the validity of this approach synthetic logs are
generated and the model is trained on these logs. The model and the
associated data ingestion pipeline can be modified to support
different kind of application or system logs.

The structure of the synthetic log is as below:
```
timestamp,component,level
1776862080.9411054,MMCS,INFO
1776862510.2804463,KERNEL,WARNING
1776862959.0126984,HARDWARE,WARNING
```

Each log line contains below fields:
- timestamp: epoch timestamp at which log was generated. the timestamp in the logs will be monotonically increasing. 
- component: component (sub-system generating) the log. Possible values are: *APP*, *DISCOVERY*, *HARDWARE*, *KERNEL*, *MMCS*
- level: severity level of the log. Possible values are: *INFO*, *WARNING*, *ERROR*, *SEVERE*, *FATAL*

For the purpose of analysis a single line with severity of SEVERE or FATAL for a component is NOT considered abnormal.
For anomaly detection the logs are analyzed in batch of 10 and a batch is deemed abnormal if the below condition is met.

- In a batch within a span of <300 seconds there are two or more logs at level **SEVERE** or **FATAL** for the same component.

An example of abnormal log batch:
```
1776864000,HARDWARE,SEVERE # (Start)
1776864153,APP,INFO
1776864160,HARDWARE,FATAL # (Delta: 160s)
1776864171,MMCS,INFO
1776864206,HARDWARE,FATAL # (Delta: 46s)
1776864835,MMCS,INFO
1776864895,HARDWARE,SEVERE
1776864960,KERNEL,WARNING
1776865078,APP,WARNING
1776865153,HARDWARE,FATAL
```

The above batch is marked *ABNORMAL* since there are more than 2 logs
for component *HARDWARE* with a time difference between any two
entries entries (at level SEVER/FATAL) < 300 seconds. The model infers
this abnormality even though the batch has log lines interspersed from
multiple components.

The synthetic logs are generated by running the driver code (main.py)
with option "generate-dummy-logs". It takes an argument batch count
that indicates the number of batches of logs that needs to be
generated, with each batch having 10 logs.

`$ python src/main.py generate-dummy-logs 100`

## Usage
`uv` is used to manage the project dependencies. Run `uv sync` to
update project dependencies and install the necessary python
packages. Alternatively the project dependencies are specified in
`requirements.txt` and can be install using `pip`

```
$ python src/main.py --help
generate-dummy-logs  Generate synthetic logs. The logs will be generated under <project_root>/synthetic. Three sets of logs: anchors_(train|valid).csv, positives_(train|valid).csv,
                     and negatives_(train|valid).csv will be generated. Size of each batch will be 10 and total number of log lines will be 10 * batch_count.
train-model          Train the model using the training and validation log samples available under <project_root>/synthetic. State of the trained model and
                     other learned parameters will be saved under specified state_root_dir, if one is specified. If no directory is specified the trained model state
                     and related configuration will be saved under <project_root>/saved_states.
infer                Run inference on the batch of logs contained in given file path. The inference will be run on batch of 10 logs at a time, and classification result will be on 
                     each batch (of 10) logs. State of the trained model and other necessary parameter will be loaded from specified state_root_dir, if one is specified. If no directory 
                     is specified the trained model state and related parameters will be loaded from <project_root>/saved_states.
```

### Sample invocations
**Model Training**
```
$ python src/main.py train-model

Starting Training and Validation
Epoch 1/40 | Train Loss: 1.4411 | Val Loss: 1.1514 | Validation Acc: 74.00% | LR: 0.001000
  -> New best model saved to '.../anomaly_detection/saved_states/cnn_siamese/model.pth' with validation accuracy: 74.00%
  ...
Epoch 40/40 | Train Loss: 0.1351 | Val Loss: 0.2659 | Validation Acc: 98.00% | LR: 0.000100
Training and Validation Complete
Best model saved to '.../anomaly_detection/saved_states/cnn_siamese/model.pth' with accuracy 99.00%
Normal Baseline (Mean): 0.1066, sigma:0.4339
Suggested Anomaly Threshold: 1.9995
```
**Inference**
```
$ python src/main.py infer data/synthetic/trial.csv 
classifying logs in file:data/synthetic/trial.csv
Batch:0:ABNORMAL, anomaly probability:0.5033,severity:4.3600
Batch:1:ABNORMAL, anomaly probability:0.5035,severity:4.3627
Batch:2:NORMAL,anomaly probability:0.0000,severity:-0.1913
Abnormal count:2, Normal count:1
```

## Model Performance & Environment

### Training Environment
    - OS: Ubuntu 24.04
    - Hardware: AMD Ryzen 9 7900X, NVIDIA RTX GPU (16GB VRAM)
### Dataset Configuration
    - Window Size: 10 log lines per batch
    - Training Samples: 10,000 triplets (Anchor, Positive, Negative)
    - Validation Split: Separate set of 1000 triplets (Anchor, Positive, Negative) that were not used for training.
    - Data Characteristics: Strictly monotonic timestamps with realistic background noise gaps (10s–100s)
### Benchmarks
    - Validation Accuracy: ~99.0%
    - Training took around ~55 seconds and training was done for 40 epochs.
    - Convergence: Hits plateau within initial epochs due to optimized feature scaling
    - Separation Margin: 
        - 99th Percentile Healthy Distance: ~1.9987382185459137
        - Maximum Healthy Distance: ~1.9997344017028809

## Further Improvements

- **Larger Window Size**: Currently the training and hence the inference
acts on logs whose batch size is 10. The model can be trained to look
at larger window of logs. Despite that it might not be possible to
correctly segregate logs and the boundary at which model looks for the
anomaly is the window of logs which it looks at one shot. This can be
remediated to an extent by choosing a larger batch size and for
inference the ingestion pipeline can send logs between a specific
interval (say of 1 min) and padding the batch entries when there is a
short fall.

- **Real-World Log Adaptation**: The training is done synthetic
data. The idea of using CNN and Siamese network would be applicable to
train on real system logs, but the model architecture (like number of
layers, number of input and output channels, embeddings ), the data
ingestion pipeline needs to be modified as part the new data format.

- **Alternative Encoders**: The CNN is used as an encoding layer this
can be modified to use other approaches like LSTM, or transformers
while keeping the model learning part one using (Siamese network) as
is.



## TODO
- Add note on curiculum learning (CL)
- Show the plots: one without CL and how training using CL helped